HELP RECORD                                         Aaron Sloman, Nov 1983

The RECORD command is used to make POP-11 keep a record of everything that
happens at your terminal.  After you type

    record in <filename>;

to POP-11, everything that you type to POP-11, and everything that POP-11
types back to you, is stored in the file <filename>. You can use any suitable
file name, e.g. 'logfile1', 'out.p' etc. If you give no file name, e.g.

    record;

then recording will go into a file called 'record.log'. The 'in' is actually
optional and may be omitted, e.g.

    record mylog;

NB: Commands to, and responses from, the editor, VED, are not recorded.

To turn recording off, use the command

    endrecord;

which returns you to normal interaction with POP-11.

While you are recording, it is not possible to use VED to look at the file
in which the interaction is being recorded; to do this you must first type

    endrecord;

After than you can treat it like any other file.

You might want to use the RECORD facility to demonstrate a program you have
written, and include the demonstration in a report on the program. If you
are working on your report file with VED, you can include your demonstration
as follows. Suppose you have used RECORD.LOG as your file, and that you are
editing your report file. Do the following steps:

(a) Choose the place where you want the contents of the RECORD.LOG file to
    appear, and put the cursor on the line above.
(b) Press the ENTER key, and type

                r record.log

    on the command line, followed by the RETURN key

The ENTER-R command tells VED to 'read in' a file from the disk, and include
it as part of the current file. The whole of the file RECORD.LOG  will be
copied into the file being edited, just below the line containing the cursor.
Remember this will not work if you have not typed

    endrecord;

to terminate recording of interaction.

RECORD will not work properly if the PROLOG system is being used. For a
version that does work with PROLOG, see the PROLOG Help file HELP *LOG.
