HELP XVED                                     Jonathan Meyer, June 1991

    If you wish to try using XVed (and are not already running XVed),
    you should do the following (ignore status messages):

        % pop11

        Setpop
        : uses xved;    ;;; this may take some time
        : xvedsetup();
        : teach xved    ;;; start XVed, get basic tutorial

    If this doesn't work, read on.


         CONTENTS - (Use <ENTER> g to access required sections)

 -- Overview
 -- If You Have Loading Problems
 -- Caveat
 -- Acknowledgement


-- Overview -----------------------------------------------------------

XVed version 2.0 is a full X Windows based version of the VED editor,
with a high degree of flexibility, programmability, and features. It is
the initial version of XVed, and will no doubt be added to, extended and
expanded in future versions.

XVed is intended to be the X Windows replacement for the Sunview PWM
VED.

To access documentation, libraries and source files related to XVed
(without loading XVed itself) you can mark and load the following line:

    uses popxved;

This will add XVed to the relevant search paths for the Poplog
system. It will not load the XVed system sources, or start running XVed.
After executing this command, you will be able to access:

    REF *XVED/Loading and Running XVed - information about running XVed

    TEACH *XVED - Basic XVed tutorial
    REF *XVED   - Complete reference to XVed

You should first read the section entitled 'Loading and Running XVed' in
REF *XVED. This will tell you all about getting started with XVed,
making XVed saved images, etc.

Once you feel a little familiar with the documentation, you should try
loading the XVed system code itself (if you have not already done so).
The commands given at the top of this file show you how to load and
run XVed.


-- If You Have Loading Problems ---------------------------------------

Note that loading XVed can take several minutes. (depending on the
machine you are on). During this time XVed should print out status
messages to let you know how it is doing. If you get any errors, the
status messages should help you to identify where things are going
wrong.

If you have difficulty loading XVed, it might be worth temporarily
disabling your vedinit.p and init.p and see if these are affecting
things. You can do this using the '%noinit' option to start Poplog:

    % pop11 %noinit
    Setpop
    : uses xved...

The help file HELP *VEDTOXVED contains information on possible problems
when switching between VED and XVed. Note that the variable
-vedusewindows- will contain the word "x" when XVed is in use. This can
be used in your "vedinit.p" file to do XVed specific setup.

A common reason for XVed failing to load is missing Xt and X11 C library
archive files. Ensure that you have a

    libXt.a
    libX11.a

    (Motif requires a libXm.a, OpenLook requires a libXol.a)

available and that the constants defined in XDEFS.PH correctly identify
where those libraries are located, or that the environment variable
'LD_LIBRARY_PATH' includes a directory with these libraries. Try
printing out the following variables:

    : loadinclude xdefs;
    : XTBASELIBS =>
    : XTLIBDIRS =>
    : XMOTIF =>
    : XOPENLOOK =>

If you get SERR errors during loading, it might be because you have the
environment variable 'popexlinkbase' set incorrectly. Ensure that

    : systranslate('popexlinkbase') =>

refers to a file which is in the same directory as the Poplog binary,
with a '.stb' extension. Also check that the file exists:

    : readable(systranslate('popexlinkbase')) =>

Remember that Poplog requires X11R4 based C libraries. It might be worth
checking that the libraries are the correct version first. If this
doesn't help, contact you system administrator, or your Poplog support
line.


-- Caveat -------------------------------------------------------------

This note is Poplog users who have written programs that drive PWM or
terminal versions of VED.

As from Poplog 14.1, XVed is a new part of Poplog. Because of this it
was reasonable to make some bold changes to the way that VED works (when
under XVed) so that it is more adapted to a windowing, event driven
environment.

These changes will NOT effect current VED users who continue to use VED
from a terminal or via PWM. However, it is possible that, if you switch
to XVed, your old VED programs will not continue working.

It is reasonably straightforward to write or modify programs so that
they continue to work under both windowing XVed and non-windowing VED or
PWM. Efforts have been taken to ensure that the changes are well
documented so that, if you do end up changing VED programs, the changes
are easy to implement. See HELP *VEDTOXVED for more information.


-- Acknowledgement ----------------------------------------------------

XVed was designed and written by Jonathan Meyer. It was developed as an
initial stage to the HyperMedia in Poplog project ("HiP"), which is a
joint TCS project between the University of Sussex and Integral
Solutions Ltd.

The development of XVed involved a large amount of feedback and help
from numerous sources. The Poplog development team all provided help
and support in making numerous decisions about VED and XVed.

A large part of the work for the XVed editor involved unseen changes to
the Poplog VED sources by John Gibson.

Aaron Sloman did much of the groundwork needed to develop XVed,
identifying and exporting the necessary procedures used by XVed to
work with VED.

Adrian Howard worked on documentation and testing of XVed.

Steve Knight, of HP Research Labs, provided a lot of user-level
commentary on what he wanted in an X based VED editor.


--- C.all/help/xved ----------------------------------------------------
--- Copyright University of Sussex 1991. All rights reserved. ----------
